They were in the process of trying to change it from
a marketing to a total chemical organization when
I went in there. And so we were evolving from
marketing into, and that's why I was in the
projects and long-range planning was to start the
planning process. Humble Oil still had
responsibility for running the manufacturing
operation. In fact, NJ reported to Humble Oil
Refining Company in Houston. Mr. Morgan Davis and
then Mr. Ricey.
So the industry, though, really is going through a
considerable whatever change, catharsis? I
think Exxon was probably one of the early ones to
split off chemicals from petroleum operations to
make a separate unit. We were in the midst of a very
high growth era in petrochemicals. The total size
of the chemical business, as I said, in the 63, the
year I was there, was $50 billion, all inclusive.
And today it's $1.4, $1.5 trillion.
Well, that's worldwide. That's all chemical.
Everything. It was a very small industry in 1963.
So the growth, there was double-digit growth in
the petrochemical business from 1960 through the
early 70s until the first oil shock.
Tremendous growth in Europe, you know, like 20% a
year.
And you're going to stay within J&M for how long?
Well I go from projects and long-range planning to
I was given a job as in the plastics division as the
operations and planning manager with
responsibility to get us into polyethylene and
then I became head of the plastics division then I
got transferred to Odenton Maryland and In
Maryland, we had a company called NJ Fibers and
Laminates. So it was a fibers and a decorative
laminate, one that competed with Formica. So when
you had what you used to make Formica, I knew
exactly what you were talking about. You did that.
We made a product called Nevermar,
N-E-V-A-M-A-R. Nevermar? Yeah. Is that still a
brand? It's still around, yeah. And our biggest
competitors, there were two of them. One was Ralph
Wilson. And Ralph Wilson was down in Temple,
Texas. And American Sign of it was made for MICA.
And GE. GE made decorative laminates until they
finally decided to go out of the decorative
laminate and they made laminates for these
control boards, you know, these electronic...
All of those things are nothing more than...
They're exactly... You take one of these...
Boards that go into a computer, that's the same as
what was used in Formica, except it doesn't have a
decorative sheet on it. It's phenol
formaldehyde.
So then I go down as executive VP of NJ Fibers and
Laminates with the responsibility to replace the
president. And he knows I came there to replace
him, but nobody else knows. And so... That's
roughly what year now? 68. Okay. And I was there 18
months.
And then I moved back to NJ as a vice president with
responsibility for half of the product lines. I'm
there for... Yeah, when you say... Yeah, I
replaced him. He left, and I took his place. We had a
strike while I was there, and we had 1,400
employees, so it was a pretty good size operation.
When we had the strike, we were having a few
problems with the pickets and things like that,
and these two enterprising young girls put an RV
across in the parking lot And the line went over to
the RV because they were prostitutes from East
Baltimore. During the strike? During the strike,
and so we had no more prostitutes. Now that is
enterprising. Yeah, right. That is
enterprising.
The guy who ran the Maryland State Police was a guy
named Captain Smith. I'd always made it a point to
meet the chief of police and in either the state,
county, or city, wherever I was. So if I ever got in
trouble, I'd always have somebody to call on. And
so I was good buddies with Captain Smith, and he
asked me, you want me to move them? I said, no, I'll
leave them there. It's better now than it used to
be. Well, now, when you were vice president for the
products. Well, we had 10 product lines, OK? And I
said I had half of them. the plastics, elastomers,
adhesives, fabricated products,
and the other guy had the raw materials and
industrial chemicals. That would be ethylene, I
mean the olefins, aromatics, the alcohols,
whatever else we had. M.E.K. No, you primarily,
your day-to-day work is primarily involving
production or marketing again? Everything. All
of the above? Everything. That's what I was
wondering. Okay. Yeah, we're a complete company,
but they separated out the chemicals from the oil
side officially in 1964. 64. 64. They formed a
separate company, and then in 19... By 1966,
everything was totally separate. It took about
two years worldwide.
So now as the vice president with NJ again, how long
was that going to take? That lasted for six months,
and then I got transferred to Europe. Oh, you
really are moving fast. I moved to Brussels. I
actually moved back. I got transferred to NJ back
in the fall of 69,
but I couldn't move until the school semester,
which was February. I moved in February, and on
June the 1st, I was on my way to Brussels to look for a
place to live. And when I got my first passport, it
was not for just to take a trip out it was to move so we
moved to brussels in the summer of 70. stayed there
through the summer of 73. how'd your family like
that loved it it was great disappointed to come
back what ages were they kids i had one daughter who
had three senior rings she had a senior ring in
maryland first half the junior year she got a
senior ring in new canaan the second half of the
junior year and she got a senior ring in brussels
the senior year so she spent one year and graduated
from international school of brussels that's a
couple of seniors she swore down she wasn't going
to go and i told her you know that when you start
making the money in the family you make the
decisions until then i'll make the decision i said
you're going right now she already worked it out to
live with somebody i said no way yeah i said no way
you're going yeah And she enjoyed the hell out of
it. So you were in Brussels three years. My three
daughters are four years apart and eight years
apart. So there's a 12-year span. So we were in
Brussels for three years. I was vice president of
SO Chem Group. And I had responsibility for
plastics and elastomers. Moved back to New York.
and New Canaan. In 73, as a product line VP, we'd
gone to a product line organization where each of
the product areas had a VP. Then I moved in 78 to
Houston to run the organization in Houston, which
is Exxon Kim Americas. Okay, now when was that
formed, Exxon Kim Americas? That's NJ. That is NJ.
NJ changed its name. When we changed our name to
Exxon in 72, we changed Exxon Chemical. We're the
only part of Exxon that uses Exxon worldwide. The
oil side uses Esso outside the U.S. and Exxon in the
U.S. So NJ Chemical Company became Exxon Chem
Americas. In 72? In 72. Okay. It was moved to
Houston
in 1970, the same time that I moved to Brussels.
We were located on the 610 loop right there where
Post Oak is. We were in one of those twin towers that
belonged to Tenneco that's been vacant now
because of asbestos.
So
you're coming to Houston. In 78, so first time
back. I stayed here for three years. Now why was
that decision made? Why move that? Well, it was the
next step up, you know, from the standpoint. We had
both a product line organization and a renewal
organization. And the regional organization did
basically the implementation, which run the
manufacturing plants and do the selling. The
product lines basically did the planning, the
strategic planning of where we're going. So it was
a different type of experience. So I came down here
in 78 and was here for three years. Built this
building while we were here. We were, as I said, on
610 Luke. And your title, again, here now?
President of Exxon Kim Americas. President of
Exxon Kim Americas. Right. And that's where I was
when
Holland first formed his group on the Lindsay
thing. Yeah, his first advisory group. Well, I
went there in 1966. I recommend that I go there. So
I
was here three years and then I get transferred
back to New York as the executive vice president of
Exxon International. So after spending what 26
years in the chemical business I get transferred
to the oil side. And I spent four and a half years as
vice president of Exxon International. Okay,
let's see those dates. Let me get roughly those. 81
to 85. Okay. Now, my guess is you were really
traveling the world about that time, were you? I
did more traveling when I was the VP of Plastics in
New York. Is that right? Yeah. That's when I went to
Saudi Arabia 27 times. I negotiated the agreement
with the Saudis for building a plant in Jebel. And
since we were working in New York City, you don't
count the days you're out of the country or out of
the state. for tax purposes, and you keep accurate
records. I was outside the U.S. in 19, what was it,
76, 63% of the days.
What was the thrust now of Exxon International in
those years, 81, 85? Exxon International
basically is the supply arm to all of Exxon's
petroleum operations. They run the marine
operation, which is the transportation of crude
oil. They acquire the crude oil. They do all of what
we call contract-type sales. In other words, they
sell aviation gasoline. They sell ship bunkers.
They sell ship lubes. So it's a... Supply,
transportation, and commodity type trading. And
you're primarily involved in movement,
distribution, planning. Yep. We had the third
largest Navy in the world. 126 ships. In tonnage,
it was the third largest. We were smaller than the
U.S. and the Russian Navy.
So, and in 85, now, and you're based, you're
stationed now, you're based out of New York. Well,
we were in New York until 83, and we moved to New
Jersey, okay? The company moved to New Jersey. So I
was in New Jersey at that time, and I knew that Ed
Homer was going to retire as president of Exxon
Chemical in 86, and lo and behold, in 85, They
transferred me to Reliance Electric to take the
job as president of Reliance Electric to get me out
of the way, I thought.
And I went out there as executive VP working for a
guy named John Morley, and they were going to move
Morley to New York. He was a treasurer by
background. They couldn't find a job for him in New
York, so they put off my taking over his job from
January 1st to April 1st. Then they put it off from
April 1st to July 1st. And then they put it off from
July 1st to September 1st. And by that point in
time, we'd already made plans to sell Reliance
Electric. So I'm there 15 months from October of 85
to December the 31st, 86. And I never take over the
job I went out there to take. I had the option of
staying with the Reliance, and I said, no, I'm
going to go back. So they offered me a job, which was
vacant at that time, as executive vice president
of Exxon Chemical. And it was located in Derry Inn.
So that was January 1, 87. And in 1990, in December,
the the guy who just retired as president of Exxon
named Chuck Sitter, he came to me and he said, how
much longer are you willing to work? And I said,
about another six months. Why? I said, I'm tired of
the Northeast. I want to go back to Texas. He said,
well, what did it take to get you to stay for five
years? At that time, I'm 57. I said, we'd had to move
the company to Texas. He said, well, go ahead. And
that's the way it was? That's the way it was. I said,
well, I'll come down and make a presentation. You
really had not thought about that. They said,
don't bother. And then they called me up and said,
don't bother to come down. There's one place you
can't go to. I said, where is that? They said,
that's Dallas. I said, well, hell, that's no
problem. I said, I was going to take it to Marshall
anyway. There are two places you can't go to. That
actually happened. Two places you can't go to. So
we moved down here in the summer of 91. So from
December, we didn't waste much time. We moved as
soon as the school year was out. And none of this was
on track or online before this happened? No. This
came up in December and February, I came down
looking for office space. And in June, July, we
were occupying offices over in Westlake, you
know, Amoco building next door. And while we built
this section on the added section on this building
here. So the guy who was running the company at that
time, that they already knew he was retiring and
that's why they asked me if I'm willing to stay for
five years and so he retired at the end of 91 and I've
been running the chemical company since then. So
you've been here since 91 in this location? In this
location since 91. And when we got here so late in
the year, I couldn't get tickets to the damn
football game. And I said, what would it take to
get, you know, some preferred seating type
tickets? They said, well, you've got to give an
endowed scholarship. I said, okay. So I gave an
endowed scholarship, got my two tickets. That's
the hard way to do it. It was costly. If you could
have come to the history department, I think we
could have done something. Yeah.
Now,
what direction? Where are chemicals going? Where
is Exxon Chemicals going? Petrochemicals? Well,
you know, our basic objective is to become a bigger
part of Exxon. We've normally been 10% of their
sales and about 10% of their capital. In sales,
since the price of crude oil was up last year, we're
still 10% of their sales. We're about... 14 or 15%
of their capital and about 16 or 17% of their
earnings. And we want to be 20% of the capital in
earnings five years from now. And what does it take
to do that? It takes a lot of investments. Yeah,
more plant? Yeah. International? Domestic?
Basically, we're going to spend most of our
capital in Asia Pacific. Most of our big capital in
Asia Pacific. We're currently... Working on two
projects, I guess. One's $2 billion and the, well,
three, if you talk about China. It'll be in the
league of $2 billion. And then we've got over a
billion dollars we're spending in Saudi Arabia
right now. All to supply Asia Pacific. In what? In
polyesters? In gasoline? Ethylene, propylene,
polyethylene, polypropylene. Oxo alcohols,
phthalic anhydride, plasticizers that go into
PVC, solvents,
but you know, we don't have to expand things like
butyl rubber or Vistalon or some of the other types
of products because they're things that can be
shipped worldwide.
So we've come from number 15 in the world when we
separated out in the early 60s, 62, 63, with sales
of $375 million to where this year we'll do, last
year we did $13.5 billion.
We have roughly 14,000 employees plus about 4,000
contractors. but that's down from 18,000
employees and 6,000 contractors in 1990. So we've
been coming down while our volume's been going up.
That's just kind of across the board in American
industry. That's right. American industry is
probably in the best shape from the standpoint of
competitiveness they've been in a long time.
Well, I think I better stop you right there. That
sounds like we've covered that. a great part of the
ballpark. I'm going to work on this and get it into
that manuscript here, there, hither and yonder,
and I'll flag those areas and, if you don't mind,
send it back to you. All right. And I really
appreciate your review.